The black colleges in the South, of course, were
originally started by northern missionaries
who, I suppose, they've gotten all the labels.
They were the nigger lovers. They were the persons
who believed that black people had this equal
opportunity to fight after the Civil War. And they
were hoping that the establishment of colleges
would help. liberate blacks from the problems
that they had. And so, of course, the funding for
many of them came from northern churches, and even
to this day. And then, of course, the Negro College
Fund eventually was formulated much later. And,
of course, the southern churches because of
various ways, have not been real strong
supporters, although I'd have to, I really can't
speak intelligently on percentages here. But, of
course, there was a tendency that once they did get
started, that the white, predominantly white,
denominational churches did give help to the
black college as much as they would give
missionary aid to sending people to Africa. same
kind of mentality. Minnesota Conference, which I
was a part, really tried to raise a lot of money for
West College. That's why I was involved with it to
some degree. And the pastor of the church where I
was serving as a campus minister was on the board of
trustees. There were all these kinds of tie-ins
with that, but I saw that kind of mentality of
giving. Again, because there was a feeling on the
part of the people in the northern churches that we
ought to do something about our country, you know,
in the South. And I think that was a worthy and noble
goal. And even to this day, there's a need for black
colleges, I believe, as well as women's colleges,
as well as other kinds of ethnic colleges, because
there's certain, according to research, as I
understand it, there's certain self-esteem that
is built into people when you have role models of
people that are like you. And I think that's worthy
in facing the problems of life that you can see
people who are like you succeeding and not feeling
the failures that are around when you don't have
those role models. Well, considering that
support from the North added the Well, of course,
they were ridiculously bad, because here, even
though the college was formed after the Civil War,
here we were in 1963. And, of course, the Civil War
was over in 1965, 1865.
And so, here the college was almost 100 years old,
and it still wasn't accredited. it was the last
black college of our church that was accredited
eventually it is now accredited and of course i
heard a story recently about i was talking to an
accrediting head of the southern association as a
matter of fact because i was on one of these
committees here in texas and he pointed out how you
know people can get accreditation if they have a
lot of money in some from New York came down to
Florida and got this thing accredited in a very
short time because they were millions, both
millions. Well, the church just didn't put enough
money into that college to get it accredited, and
so an unaccredited college does not attract a lot
of students. And so that was a very big problem, and
fortunately that has now been overcome. I don't
know if I fully answered your question, but it
shows that finances of the church were not given to
meet some of these ethnic and minority concerns.
Now, the Methodist Church for the last two
quadrenniums has put the ethnic church as number
one. So now, there is a real emphasis in giving
towards these concerns more than any other
concerns. So again, Methodist Church is a
national and international leader in this very
thing and I'm glad to know that I belong to a church
that is trying to practice in all its policies a
more equalitarian than any other denomination or
church that I know in the world today. The ethnic
church in the United States or in the world, the
missions field, is where the most money is going
right now? Oh, the Methodist Church is always all
denominations. They put more money into their
local church than they ever give to missions. And
domestic missions are their own missions. That's
a natural phenomenon.
Did you ever get to meet the professor that you
exchanged with? Yes, I met him. We visited
briefly. What was his reaction to his experience?
A lot of problems existed in the Mankato area
because he was a black person, he was perceived as a
black person because he isn't learning. Just to
give you an example, a very strange thing
happened. We had a heating system problem in our
house and the heating system would go bang because
of various times he couldn't uniformly get around
the pipes and he was scared to death a number of
times he thought somebody had bombed the building
and of course that was partly due to the fact that
that was actually happening in Birmingham there
was this terrible bombing and we had racists in
Mankato I was I wasn't threatened but I was called
even by some of the people in our congregation, in
various derogatory terms, because of my interest
in helping in
this equality work that we were working on. So did
he give any advice to you all upon returning of
things that could be done in your cave in a previous
situation? He wasn't one to give advice on that,
and I wasn't one to give advice to him either. We
both were humbled by the experience of living in a
way in two different cultures, and yet here we were
citizens of the same country. When did, upon
returning home, was that when you first started to
hear about the March on Washington, or was that
when the works were while in Illinois? Well, of
course, it was the same year that I was in that
exchange in the spring. And then, of course, I was
active in student work. So I think the march in
Washington was just a culmination of our
expression of frustration over the whole
situation. I mean, people generally don't march
unless there's a lot of frustration going on in
their hearts and minds. So this is just a
culmination of hundreds of years of frustration
that we were expressing. Frustration in our own
religion that was not practicing what it
preached. Frustration in the democracy that was
not practicing what it preached. Frustration in
the educational system that was
saying certain things in the textbooks, but not
really living it out. in educational
institutions, and on and on and on. Just total
frustration
with the words of democracy and the lack of
practice.
So what were your steps to go to UN as a delegate for
the Methodist Church for the Minnesota
Conference? Well, these things happened really
quickly. March
on Washington was being organized and there was
going to be all this happening and some of us were
interested in participating in it and so
different kinds of things happened. At Mankato
State different groups were praying about it,
working on it, and decided that certain people
ought to be sent as delegates, and then I was a part
of a regional system of the Methodist Church, and I
was one of the associate deans of the summer camp
program that met every year, and they also felt we
ought to be a part of this, and so there were
different organizations in the church, both in
the local, regional, and national level. And then
there were some of us that volunteered to be a part
of this representative process. So that's how it
happened. So in going to the march, you felt like
the main purpose was a mass expression of
frustration about the institution you were in?
frustration about the political, religious, and
educational, and economic institutions of our
country, that we're not living up to the ideals
that were written down as practices and policies
to follow in dealing with people who are of
different races and colors and creeds. What do you
feel was the response from, as an attempt to lobby
for Kennedy's moderate civil rights package, and
to Martin Luther King said he felt like the march
was a subpoena on the conscience of the United
States. What was your response after that day?
Well, I think it was the greatest step forward in
American democracy. even greater than the
American Revolution or the Civil War in terms of a
positive kind of witness that made us world
leaders, I believe, and still world leaders in
trying to practice some of these things that we
have in our Bible and in the US Constitution. Which
speaker affected you the most?
Well, of course, you know, I could say it was Martin
Luther King and his great dramatic
speech. I had a dream there at the memorial, but I'm
not sure that that was... I think the greatest
speaker was the Spirit of God working in the midst
of our humanity. The voice of God, the voice of
human conscience over
all of history,
human history. And these were the voices that I
heard. I think the voice of Christ Of course,
Martin Luther King would quote Christ, and so I saw
a, and as far as that goes, it was the voices, you
know, universally around the world.
One of the speakers at that day was from the Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. called
SNCC. They came out of the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference with Martin Luther King
started, and he was a rather militant speaker. Do
you remember that? Like you said, Louis? Well, I
remember hearing of him, knowing of him. I never
knew him personally, and I, um, disagreed with a
number of the people who
ideologically nor practically did I agree with.
Some people felt that although Martin Luther King
preached nonviolence, that in effect his
preaching of nonviolence was actually inciting
violence. How do you feel about that? Well, the
same criticism was made of Jesus and Gandhi and
others. You remember Jesus, Gandhi, and others
did not have a political army, you know. And what
are the alternatives if you don't have an army and
computers and missiles? What are your
alternatives to power? About all you have is the
people and mass, or a person as an individual. But
do
you think that the changes that were accomplished
during that period could have been
done without the violence and things that did take
place, without the change in the South, the
antagonistic attitude towards the South? Well,
you have to measure violence. Look, when we had war
with England, And we separated from them, and that
was, we had a lot of people die. But it was a small
number compared to what died in the Civil War, the
largest number in the history of the country. And
neither the issues of the Revolutionary War or the
Civil War were settled in any form or fashion,
really. Whereas this did help settle some of the
issues that they aren't. fully worked out, but at
least we do have some semblance of American
democracy being practiced on all levels of our
society now in 1985, whereas we didn't have that in
1865 or in 1776. We had these paper promises. Now I
think we're beyond paper promises and we do some
practical realism. Nothing's accomplished in
this world, unfortunately, save through war or
political protest or Pearl Harbor type
experiences because of the idiotic behavior of
people. Concrete thinking, people have their
minds set in concrete. And no matter, you know,
presently I'm engaged in this suicide youth,
teenage situation, but it doesn't affect anybody
until a Pearl Harbor happens in a family or a
community, and then you can start working. And I
can't tell you why. I mean, I'm working, and it
hasn't happened here, but there's a a small
minority of us that work on these problems of
society, whether it be war, suicide, civil
rights, poverty, feeding the hungry, saving the
environment, we've got terrible problems with
acid rain in the environment now, and those are
just some of my concerns, and we're just a small
number. And we're all human, we get tired, we don't
have money, but Sometimes we have to use large
crowds. Sometimes we have to use the mass media.
Sometimes we have to use protest letters to make
it. Well, I guess what I'm referring to is
something like the Selma March, where the
marchers tried to cross that bridge for days.
There were two people killed, two white was
something like that really necessary? And I get to
see some, what some Southerners think is that if
the civil rights movement had taken place in the
sense that it did with the sit-ins and all, that
today, socially, there'd be a better situation
between whites and blacks. And one comment that
was made is that a lot of the legislative progress
that was made during the 50s and the 60s is now being
overturned in the 80s. For instance, with what is
that thing in Texas that came up about the tuition?
Being able to take your tuition to anywhere that
you go, want to go to school.
That seems to me like a recall of that to what
Virginia was trying to do. Well, I think that all
these things are ups and downs. You move one inch
ahead and you retreat one mile behind in human
rights and civil rights. And that's the way of
humanity. As long as we have humans, there's going
to be that reaction phenomena. So I can't answer it
except to say yes, I think. There are some things
that are, in some parts of the country, maybe not as
favorable as they ought to be or they should be. But
overall, comparing 1963 with 1985, I see many more
favorable things now than then.
That's the only way I can answer it. You know, with
specific situations, you can always find things
that are different.
I guess one thing about Martin Luther King, that
was the second time that you heard him speak. When
was the first time? Yeah, second time in person,
but of course I heard him continually during that
era on television, the radio, and so forth. But the
first time we had invited him to come to be our
Wesley Foundation speaker, and of course he was
with us for a number of days, and I got to know him in
the context of better than, you know, often you get
to know most people, which, you know, you hear them
at a rally, or a speech, and that's it. What were
your impressions? I felt that he was a sincere
person who was attempting to live out the
convictions of his life. His father was a pastor in
Atlanta, and he definitely, I thought, was trying
to bring to our consciousness the fact that our
Christianity was not doing what the New Testament
had indicated that it should be doing in this time
in history. And I think that he was doing what a
preacher ought to be doing who was convicted to
bring both personal and social justice to us and of
course I saw in him the prophetic voices of Amos and
Hosea and others in the Old Testament who tried to
help the Jewish people long before Christ to be
more compassionate to each other as well as their
neighbors and bring justice and understanding to
the people that were living in those BC times. What
was the response of the community to his presence?
Well, the Mankato community in general were
impressed with his oratory and his sincerity and
the fact that he was trying to, as a person, unright
the wrongs of humanity throughout history.
through his movement, Southern Leadership
Travellers.
He was brought by Wilbur Gross, is that right?
Well, he was brought by a number of us who felt he was
a local witness to some of the convictions that we
believe are inherent in the Old and New Testament.
Did his wife come along with him? No, he didn't.
Would you like to make any general conclusions or
further comments about that period of time? Well,
I would say that I was glad that I lived through that
era of time because it helped me understand how
important it is as a person who has been given many
good things, such as a religious heritage that
sees a uniformity and equality inherent in our
faith and also I'm thankful for our political
heritage and the fact that we have a constitution
that says idealistically what we ought to be and
I'm thankful also for having an educational
opportunity in this country to have had
professors and fellow students who helped me
understand the importance of all of these things.
I think that era of history is one that
really, as I said, did more than the
Revolutionary War or the Civil War to help
humanity see that we need to focus in on the values
of human beings, that all human beings have worth
in terms of their life. And out of that came an
appreciation, not just for blacks, but for browns
and yellows
reds and all the other rainbows of humanity. I
think that also that period of history helped us
see how
utterly difficult it is always to change our legal
system and our institutions and even our families
to appreciate people who are different than we
are. And I think that it's helped me individually
to try to bridge the gaps and the barriers that are
ever around us in trying to relate to people,
listen to people, understand people. I
personally believe that most important thing
that we can do as a country and as members of the
human race is to gain these kinds of
understandings and to try to live them out so that
we can avoid human prejudice and conflict,
violence and war. I think that this is something
that goes beyond Any ideology or religion, it
should universally be in our veins to do that.
Unfortunately, it isn't that way genetically, so
we have to work in a sociological way through the
institutions of politics, religion, the family,
in the socialization of of people, and I think it
differentiates us from the animals when we do
that. When we don't do it, I think we are back to
stark jungle. In fact, the jungle, and I've lived
in the jungle, is actually better than the jungle
we create with our prejudice.
The raw jungle is a safer environment, more safe
environment, I find, than the jungle that we have
created by our prejudices.
Here is a quote I found. I guess it was about that
violence that I was trying to play here. I was
trying to talk about something that Martin Luther
King said. He said, I've almost reached the
regrettable conclusion that the Negro's
greatest stumbling block in the stride towards
freedom is not the white citizens' council or the
Ku Klux Klan, but the white moderate who is more
devoted to order than to justice. That's what I was
trying to say. I guess that was one thing I was
reading about this Ku Klux Klan. Well, I think, you
know, that it's,
that's an interesting problem, because later on,
when I started to work with blacks, on various
projects. I was rejected because I was seen as a
paternalistic white who was cultivating their
interest in it. Now, since the law gave them
equality again, of course in the law, but we
weren't enforcing it, that I was interfering with
their understanding. They didn't need any white
leadership anymore. They could carry it
themselves. And all I've got to say for the poor
black, or for the person that has that mentality,
and I speak right to Martin Luther King here,
there's no man, Martin Luther King or anybody
else, that I wouldn't challenge. I'm a thinking
person too. and I would challenge Martin Luther
King to say that we can't really get along without
each other. I don't think he'd disagree with that.
But that we really haven't got time to blame
different kinds of people either. I think he said
some of that, probably some of the bitterness that
he experienced And again, not being treated
probably equally. There were some liberal whites
who got into the southern Christian leadership
movement and assumed
leadership and took it away from some of the
blacks. And I think that's what he was, he probably
was striking back at that and he probably resented
that to some degree. I don't know. He's dead. It'd
be interesting to to talk with him if he were here
about that. But I think it's probably some of his
own feelings and resentment that even in this
movement, there were some whites who put order,
peace, somewhat like the problem of...
Sometimes it's just like in all of life, you've got
to go through a conflict before you can get to the
other side sometimes. And sometimes we, yeah, we
would rather not talk to each other, we'd rather
not confront one another, we'd rather not say one
another, to one another, the things we ought to say
because we think we might hurt each other, and yet
if we remain silent and we don't say it, ultimately
in the long run we'll be guilty of
problems. And I think I've made those mistakes
too, and I continue to make those mistakes. And
there are some people who are not close friends of
mine because I do speak my mind to them. And
sometimes it was in case and in times of trying to
help save their life, be it from drugs or whatever,
that I said what I said. And I'm sorry, I thought
more of their life than I did of our friendship. And
that may be also true of some of the people who are my
relatives and friends who I've spoken directly
to, not in anger, but just, you don't have to say it
in anger, it just still can be misunderstood, you
know. And I said it because of their health and
their life more than it was interesting. If I hurt
them because I said it, I said it. I regret that I
hurt them, but I don't regret that I said
it. Well, thank you very much, Dad. Thank you for
your good questions. They were hard.